# TransSSVs
Detecting somatic small variants in paired tumor and normal sequencing data with attention-based neural network

We first select the candidate somatic sites from the mixed pileup file which generated by Samtools from tumor and normal BAM files based on the criteria. Next it encodes the mapping information around the candidate somatic sites. Each array is a spatial representation of mapping information adapted for convolutional architecture. For each candidate site, we generate a feature matrix for the content context sequence. Then, the multi-head attention captures the interactions of the genomic sites in the context sequence to achieve a new feature representation of the genomic context. Next,   Finally, these features are used to predict the somatic probability for the candidate somatic sites. Finally, potential somatic small variants determined by the TransSSVs model are generated in the variant call format (VCF).

TransSSVs was tested on Debian GNU/Linux 11 (bullseye) and requires Python 3.

Prerequisites
----------
TensorFlow 2.7.0 <br>
sklearn 0.19.2 <br>
pandas 1.3.5 <br>
numpy 1.21.6 <br>
keras 2.7.0 <br>


Getting started
----------
<br>
1. Run samtools (tested version: 1.8) to convert tumor and normal BAM files to a mixed pileup file required by TransSSVs:<br><br>

`samtools mpileup -B -d 100 -f /path/to/ref.fasta [-l] [-r] -q 10 -O -s -a /path/to/tumor.bam /path/to/normal.bam | bgzip > /path/to/mixed_pileup_file`<br><br>Note: For the case of applying TransSSVs on a part of the whole genome, increase the BED entry by n (the number of flanking genomic sites to the left or right of the candidate somatic site) base pairs in each direction, and specify the genomic region via the option -l or -r. <br><br>
2. Run identi_candi_sites.py to identify candidate somatic small variants from the mixed pileup file: <br><br>` identi_candi_sites.py
 --Tumor_Normal_mpileup /path/to/mixed_pileup_file
 --Candidate_somatic_sites /path/to/candidate_sites`<br><br>
3. Run mapping_infor_candi_sites.py to create a file with mapping information for candidate somatic small variant sites as input for trained TransSSVs, or to create a file with mapping information for validated somatic sites for training TransSSVs:<br><br> `mapping_infor_candi_sites.py --Tumor_Normal_mpileup /path/to/mixed_pileup_file --Candidate_validated_somatic_sites /path/to/candidate_sites --number_of_columns N --length L --path /path/to/save --filename_1 filename_1 `<br><br>
4. Run model_train.py to train TransSSVs:<br><br>`
5. Run model_infer.py to predict somatic small variants:<br>

Please help us improve TransSSVs by reporting bugs or ideas on how to make things better. You can submit an issue or send me an email.<br>
Jiangyuan Wang<br>
wjy_bazi@hotmail.com

